---
title: Java Basics
layout: article
---

# Overview

The Java ecosystem is large and diverse. It contains thousands of libraries, tools, and frameworks, and many vendors alternatives. But before diving into that, you must
first learn the very basic concepts of Java.

## Core Principles

"Java" means many things: it is a language, a runtime (the virtual machine), a set of core APIs, an ecosystem, and last but not least, a trademark.

### Java Language

The [Java Specification Language](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se11/html/index.html) document dictates the structure, syntax, semantics, type system, 
expressions and core runtime system. It does not specify a standard library though.

### Bytecode

Bytecode is the computer instruction set, a binary format - the `class` format - that is interpreted by a JVM. It is often generated as the outcome of the compilation process of a programming language such as Java, Scala, Kotlin, and other programming languages that aim at using the Java Virtual Machine as a runtime. Although bytecode can be manually written, it is actually better to programmatically manipulate generated bytecode out of compilation with existing libraries and APIs.

### Java Virtual Machine

The JVM is used to interpret and run bytecode that may have been produced by the compilation of Java code or any other language that can be compiled into bytecode (e.g. Scala, Kotlin). The JVM is also specified in a very agnostic way when it comes to programming languages. A JVM may be implemented in many ways, for many targeted host environments, as long it respects the [Java Virtual Machine Specification](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se11/html/index.html).

### Java Core Library

The Java core library, also known as "Java SE", defines the core Java platform APIs that is then used by developers to build applications.

### OpenJDK

The [OpenJDK](https://openjdk.java.net) project holds an open source implementation of the core library APIs of Java, as well an open source reference implementation, production-ready Java Virtual Machine known as HotSpot. The project is also used to govern the evolution of Java, both in terms of language specification, core APIs, and Virtual Machine.

## Tools

Java developers use mostly the following tools when writing, compiling, and running Java applications:

### javac

This is the default compiler that comes with any Java Development Kit (JDK). Simply point to a Java source code file `.java`, and it will output a binary file `.class`.

### java

This is the main binary to run Java code. It is used to run bytecode (e.g. `.class` files) as well single-file source code, as seen in the first page (e.g. `java HelloWorld.java`).

### jar

Used to package a set of `.class` files to easily distribute/share a project. It is the default packaging mechanism of Java programs.

### javadoc

Used to generate HTML-based documentation out of the documentation contained inside the source code as comments.
